---
layout: single
title:  "Vim Setup and Basics"
date:   2020-06-24 13:50:41 +0200
categories: [editors, vim setup]
tags: [editors, vim, vimrc]
comments: true
toc: true
published: true
---


Describes how to setup vim using a popular vimrc and explains the basics.



## Search and Replace

```console
                             ?
                            Up
g#        #        N       Find    n      *         g*
Prev     Prev     Prev      /     Next   Next     Next
Partial  Current  Match    Down   Match  Current  Partial
Match    Word                            Word     Match
```

Delete from cursor to the end of a search:

```console
d/pattern/e<Enter>
```

Yank (copy) from cursor to beginning of previous "pattern":

```console
y?pattern<Enter>
```

Search and replace:

```console
:%s/search/replace/
```

The previous searchs and repleaces only the first occurence of the pattern in each line of the current buffer `%`.
To replace all occurences in all lines (not just the first) use:

```console
:%s/search/replace/g
```

Other useful search flags:

```console
:[range]s[ubstitute]/{pattern}/{string}/[flags] [count]
```

- `c` Confirm or skip each match
- `i` Ignore case
- `I` Case-sensitive
- `n` Show number of matches (non-destructive)
- `p` Print matching lines


Use scopes for search to act on either the current line or the entire file:

```console
:%s/a/b/
```

A leading percent (denotes the current buffer) searches all lines in the current file.


```console
:s/a/b/
```

Omit the percent to search only the current line.



```console
:.,`a s/a/b/
```

Complicated ranges are possible. This searches from the cursor (`.`) to mark `a`. Search ranges work with lines not characters.
Other ways to specify a line:

- `.` Current line
- `+5` Five lines down
- `-3` Three lines up
- `1` Line one of buffer
- `$` Last line of buffer
- `%` All lines in buffer
- `'t` Position mark t
- `/pattern/` Next line where pattern matches (Also try `?patter?`)


To see the range, use visual mode `v`. Use `o` to reposition the cursor to the other end of the region.
Use the range specifier `:'<,'> s/a/b/` to search in the visually selected region.

You can use global command to execute a command on all lines that match a pattern.

```console
:[range]g[lobal]/{pattern}/[cmd]
```

- `#` Show matches with line numbers
- `d` Delete matching lines
- `y` Yank matching lines
- `normal {command}` Execute an extended sequence

Show lines and line numbers where pattern occures:

```console
:g/pattern/#
```

Delete blank lines:

```console
:g/^$/d
```
Yank lines after the one that match:

```console
:g/pattern/+y
```


