---
layout: single #collection
title: Autonomous 2WD Robot - Components
permalink: /projects/2wd-robot/parts/
excerpt: "Components of an autonomous 2WD Robot equipped with a Raspberry Pi 4 B running ROS melodic to sense and act in an environment."
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/projects/autonomous-rc-car/hpi-racing-bmw-m3.png
  overlay_filter: 0.5 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
  caption: "Source: [**hpiracing**](http://www.hpiracing.com/de/kit/114343)"
  show_overlay_excerpt: true
sidebar:
  nav: "2wd-robot"
---

Part list and assembly of the robot platform and the components.

## Robot Base

The [Robot Car Kit 2WD](https://joy-it.net/en/products/robot05) from Joy-IT (article no.: robot05) is used as the base for the autonomous mobile robot. The acrylic chassis has many holes which allow to mount a mounting plate that can hold different development boards.
It allows also to mount a Raspberry Pi 4 B, which will be used in this project. Two wheels, hence 2WD, are included in the kit which can be attached to the motors that are provided too. A third caster wheel is provided which allows the robot to spin on the spot. This means the robot can be described by a holonomic model. 

The motors operate in a range between 3 to 9 Volts DC and make it possible to mount a punched disk for speed measurements. 
With that punched disk and additional speed sensors it is possible to implement odometry in ROS. 
To power the motors a battery compartment is available together with a switch to turn the robot on or off.


The following image shows how I mounted the robot car kit. Notice that I placed the battery compartment on the bottom of 
the acrylic chassis instead of on top of it as suggested in the instructions manual. 
The reason is that I will use an additional USB-C powerbank to power the Raspberry Pi 4 B.

TODO figure

To assemble the robot car kit it is important to mount the motors on the correct side of the acrylic plate becasue otherwise
the mounting plate where the RPi will be attached will not fit to the pre drilled holes.
 


## Perception

- Ultrasonic Ranger
- Camera

### Ultrasonic Ranger




### Camera


## Human Machine Interface (HMI)

### OLED Display

http://wiki.seeedstudio.com/Grove-OLED_Display_0.96inch/

Connected to the RPi via i2c on the physical pins 27 (scl) and 28 (sda), refere to the [pinout](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/i2c).

[Library](https://github.com/DexterInd/GrovePi/blob/master/Software/Python/grove_i2c_oled_128_64/grove_128_64_oled.py)


